[Music]
you
so welcome friends welcome back to this
lecture on concepts and categorizations
and basically I've given it the title
let me organize so basically that's what
our concept when categorization really
means it helps you to organize knowledge
now what do we study in this particular
lecture so what we do is this lecture is
exactly an extension of the semantic
memory lecture where we saw how world
knowledge facts and arithmetic rules and
procedures and that kind of knowledge
each a which has some element of
consciousness into it my my the element
of a conscious retrieval into it how are
they arranged into the cognition how it
how is it our into the mental concept or
the mental structure so what concepts in
categorization are basically these are
the process of organizing this knowledge
now in the semantic memory lecture we
saw that there are several models and
these models what they do is they go
ahead and explain the organization of
knowledge into semantic memory and one
of the famous models which was explained
in the semantic memory lecture was the
hierarchical structure model so but the
hierarchical structure model explained
is that there are nodes and these nodes
are connected by monitors and so there
are top level loads and and sub level
nodes and so on and so forth so that's
kind of arrangement with the semantic
memory lecture talks about so basically
what in this lecture we'll see is this
how what is the meaning of this node or
what is the feature of this node and so
the nodes that we talked about in
semantics when the lecture is basically
concepts so concepts are kind of mental
representation there
of loans which hold a lot of knowledge
into it and concepts also help us in
categorizing information so why is
categorization important so as you
remember that the human brain has a
limited capacity and so it can do only a
limited number of jobs now number of
neurons is limited we saw in the lecture
on long-term memory that there is a
limited number of information that you
can hold on to memory even the
calculations are given there which
basically means that the human brain has
to do something in terms of organizing
or in terms of archiving data in in the
mental lexicon and so one way to do that
is basically categorization so
categorization is a process which
basically goes ahead and it form some
kind of a mental bucket where you put an
information based on either similarity
or some other aspect so basically that
is what categorizations really mean and
the principle in which categorization
works is basically the principle of how
concepts are formed or what are the
guidelines of a concept so using the
guideline of a concept a categorization
is done so let this gen begin this
lecture on concept and categorization
now let's look at this psychology what
is it
psychology is basically in most Indian
universities they are taught under the
arts stream they are taught under the
arts faculty or sometimes that is the
social science faculty and so most
people when you talk about psychology
they will say there is in subject to the
arts or a subject of the social sciences
and you imagine social sciences but most
all universities will clamp it into arts
but if you look into most Western
University psychology is not an arts
it's not taught under arts it's talking
to brain in behavioral sciences or
sometimes it is taught in the Medical
Sciences or
Natural Sciences now this basic
classification of a psychology should be
is basically demonstration to show how
categorization happens and these
categorizations
of placing psychology into social
science or arts or into the Natural
Sciences or into the medical sciences
basically they are done based on some
kind of a conceptualization basic
basically based on some kind of a rule
or some kind of an aspect or some kind
of a feature that psychology share with
these Sciences and so this is basically
formation of a concept so there is a
concept and the concept is basically a
mental representation a mental bucket so
the reason why these Western
universities go ahead and classify
psychology in two Sciences as opposed to
what in our country it is done in terms
of the arts or social sciences is
basically dependent dependent on the
mental representation of how they look
into psychology and so this is basically
a demonstration of how concepts and
categorization happen so they have some
concept the Westerners have some concept
of psychology because it uses scientific
methods a verification of some kind of
data falsification some kind of
repetitions and experimentations and so
they are classified into science but in
terms of our own country they don't look
at these aspects and they have some
other aspects of psychology for example
is social aspect or organizational
aspect and because of that they classify
them into then the art sciences or into
the social sciences group dealing with
society and so on and so forth but
that's the kind of
division visible and so this example
then explains what is the difference
between the concept and categorization
is but before going into the more
details of it let's look at what is
basically the proper definition of a
concept or categories so starting before
starting I have some diagrams or as some
figures for you which which are quite
funny to look at and they explain
something about water concepts and water
categorization and so first figure says
that there are a property so a concept
has certain property and so within the
concept then you have so here you see
the concept of a cup and a coffee which
is a sign of a concept so basically it's
an emblem of a concept or it's the logo
of a concept and so when you see
something like this you basically
believe that it's a coffee shop or it's
something which is hot beverage to be
drawn and so it has certain properties
so when it say it is a coffee this
drawing represents our coffee in a
certain properties and these are the
properties of a concept and so further
on this is the concept so if you look
into it this is the emblem or this is
the referral or the logo for a concept
and these are the properties of this
concept and so basically this is what a
concept looks like so it is the mental
representation of what a coffee would
look like these are the properties of a
concept so every type of coffee that we
classify here that we put here into this
coffee's the diagram should have these
properties and as we look into it this
is called categorization so in
categorization what you do is you take
in items or you take in elements events
or instances of objects which are
similar to the concept and place it
under one particular bin and that is
basically called categorizations as you
look into it so this is coffee and so
there are properties of coffee is a
shape type color aroma ingredients and
so on and so forth and in terms of
categorization the reference our latte
cappuccino espresso a black coffee or
the iced coffee or it could be some
other form of coffee which oh it could
be the Irish coffee or some other form
of half coffee which it could be so
basically this is the concept and this
is the property of categorization and so
categorization has done based on these
property so as you see that most of
these type of coffees have these
properties and so this is the process of
categorization now a funny cartoon to
look into it and so here if you look on
the right hand side there is this
particular cartoon which explains that
this lady says I do understand the
concept of what cooking is I don't know
how does it apply to me she doesn't want
to cook and so that's the reason why she
is putting into these facts here and so
that might be the reason why is she
saying what she is saying so again
coming back to the definition of what
concepts are before we understand that
let's look at what do humans do by doing
cognition or what does cognitive
processes and actually they do so in
general the normative psychologists
believe that humans they form mental
representations and that these are
processed by the cognitive processes so
whenever we whenever we store knowledge
or whenever we take all knowledge and
store into our brain or mind what we do
is we form a mental representation of it
and this mental representation is what
is processed by the brain or by
different cognitive processes so what is
basically mental representation mental
representation is the psychological
equivalent of the physical
representation right and so remember in
the first lecture when we looked at
different different kind of mental
representations so we saw the spatial
arrangement and
and the abstract arrangement so in terms
of further amplified there are two
mental representations that I will show
you here and so in one metal
representation what really happens is
that I can show you a visual or a
propositional mental representation in
the visual representation I draw this
kind of a structure and I put a ball on
it and so this explains the ball is on
the table or in the prepositional this
representation I can say ball on n table
are two propositions of how the ball is
connected to it so remember for the
first class both of them represent the
same thing the idea is that the ball is
on the table and so these two formats of
what are called mental representations
and so what a mental representation
these are the psychological equivalent
of physical representation so what
cognition does is that they take in
information from the world and convent
mental representations and you say well
cognitive processes to process this
mental representation and so thus all
knowledge in humans are stored as mental
representations and that they in turn
guide our behavior so basically then
most knowledge that we have they are
stored in terms of these mental
representations different kind of metal
representations be it is visual beat in
order to deform weight in in
propositional form and different other
different forms of propositional form is
a famous form which Anderson goes ahead
and talks about he says that most mental
representations are stored in
propositional form so there's a
proposition to it and so that's how
basically it is they're stored into so
we did some part of propositional
thought and propositional
representations in the earlier classes
so remember from there that's what it is
so basically then the idea here is that
it is mental representations they told
an
and his mental representational data
processed by human beings and most
behavior that humans do is by the
processing of these mental
representations for mental
representations how are they stored they
ask Torres concepts and categories so
remember the coffee example what we did
was the idea the the logo of a cup kind
of a Gyan or a cup kind of a Jian and a
plate kind of a genre presence of coffee
and so this is the mental representation
of visual mental representation and when
I show you this there are several
knowledge which comes with it for
example the property is the type of
things so the remembering different
types of it you physically call calls in
the process of categorization and
remembering that this is coffee is
called concept
so basically concepts and
categorizations are basically play
around mental representations so what is
a concept then what is the meaning of a
concept the concept is a mental
representation of some object event or
pattern that stores in it much of the
knowledge typically thought relevant to
object pattern or even so basically
mentally the concept stores in some
mental representation and knowledge
related to mental representation so in
our earlier example the idea or the
coffee logo it stores with it that this
is the logo so the material presentation
of a coffee in terms of the logo and
some knowledge which is relevant to it
in terms of object event in pattern so
example the different type of coffees
which are available right what is the
aroma of a coffee what is the taste of
the coffee where can I find it what is
the price of a coffee different
countries from where coffee comes in and
so these are all related knowledge right
related to the idea of coffee and so
this is what is stored into that
particular concept of Akaka so it's
basically income the semantic memory if
you activate that note if you energize
the coffee node several other nodes will
energize
so when I think about the coffee cup
when I see about the coffee cup a lot of
knowledge come
to mine and these lots of colleges are
connected to different different
semantic networks and so one is if one
is any energy the other is also in a
chest and so depending on the context
depending on the priority the or
nearness or semantic nearness it it will
decide which I energy is more and which
I energize less basically something or
from the semantic memory thing so
basically let's now stick to only the
idea of what a concept in categorization
is so in terms of an example the idea of
a dog the concept of a dog
what does it comprised of it comprises
of that reason animal so first thing is
in terms of a dog a dog in an animal it
has four legs so basically another piece
of knowledge which is stored with you
that's just four legs it has a tail it
has man's best friend these are all
different kinds of knowledge and all
different kind of facts which are there
or it barks or it eats certain kind of
foods or there are different varieties
of dog all this information is basically
stored into a concept so concept is
basically a mental bin around which
knowledge is restored a number of
knowledge is stored or comprised into or
fitted into and so that's what a concept
is now if that is what a concept is what
is categorization basically a category
is defined as a class of similar things
object or entities that share a couple
of factors and has an essential core so
basically what do I mean by this its
type of things or classes of things
which which have similar objective with
similar object as a better entities for
example let's look at a kennel of dogs
or a field of the dogs full of dogs now
when you look into it then different
kinds of dogs or if you have seen dog
shows nine dog shows you see basically a
dog show is a category and so what
happens is there are different kind of
dogs or dog itself is a category so with
the dog category you have different
kinds of dogs you would have a chameleon
you would have an Aussie Shane you would
have a scene but now you will have a
German Shepherd and some other kind of
dog different kinds of dogs which is the
Rottweiler and so different kinds of
dogs are there and all of them differ in
some aspect or the other so there are
variations there are differences within
it but they share one or two things
which are essentially core for example
the idea that they have bark now that is
a core property so most dogs that you
look into will bark although there will
be an exception and so they will
discussed it in the last class in in the
semantic memory where it might be
possible that one or two incidents may
not be similar so that's one thing to be
looked at
so categorization includes similar
things together but then what happens is
they share one or two features or they
share at least one essential core with
it
so for example the ideal acquire all
signs of course is considered as
Sciences so the basic question that we
did or some similar similarity in
perceptual biological or functional
property basically things which are
clubbed together which are categorized
together they share some kind of
features whether they share an essential
core or they share some kind of
similarity between them so we can always
have categories where things do not
share properties for example let's say
the category of it house now when I say
the category of an house within the
house will have several things for
example you will have a mother a father
which are human beings then you would
have chairs desks or you will have
tables you will have eating things
electrical appliances all of them
together are there but they can be
clubbed together as a category so these
features then share one feature which is
they are parts of a cattle category the
house or the household right and so this
is how it is so at times the most items
in a category sash
some kind of a feature on at times what
happens is that is not share core
features but they say characteristic
features or they share some properties
which are either perceptual biological
functional or some other relation but
something is shared upon them so items
which share some kind of features
together and clubbed together is what is
a category or what is the process of
categorization then what is the nature
of a concept so as I explained to you
the nature of a concept has to do with
the idea of categorization and what can
a concept actually do now concepts help
us in establishing order on the
knowledge base so what does it really
mean it really means that through
categorization through forms a formation
of concepts we can form some kind of an
order for example what is the higher
concept what is the lower concept who's
bigger who's smaller kind of a thing so
within a number of concepts within a
number of items which we have we can
then assign some kind of order now
remember in the hierarchical semantic
Network we looked at something called
the subordinate in the superordinate
node right and so concepts shared or
concepts were always the superordinate
node and other things items when the
super the subordinate nodes
similarly when we have concept this
concept allow us to basically arrange
things into order for example think
about musical instruments so musical
instrument is a higher level concept
within that we'll have string
instruments we'll have an air
instruments will have wind instruments
will have other kind of instruments
which can be beaten to be played for
example drums and all so different kind
of instruments will be there so there is
an order to it so and this order of how
it starts with a musical instrument -
coming back to a string instrument and
between the string instrument you have
the guitar or the sitar and then you
will have several others so there is a
hierarchy or there is an order and so
this order classification is important
that is what categorization really or
concepts really do also concepts help us
to categorize that is what we are trying
to tell you that with concepts we can
put items into mental buckets so once we
know that this is what a concept is this
is what concept a is this concept B
exists these concepts will have certain
features right certain aspects and these
aspects will help us put similar things
together right and so that is what
concepts really do also categorization
helps us making prediction for example
if something is coming from somewhere a
four-legged animal is coming from
somewhere wiggling his tail and he comes
near us and his tongue is out of his
mouth and his sweating kind of dripping
onto food oh and he looks more or less
like category or dock then you can
predict that it will also bark right and
so this idea that if it looks like a dog
and can classify the dog you can make
predictions so categorization helps you
in making predictions of what a
particular item and you might them in
the category is supposed to do because
it should share some features of the
category so with that with all these
features you can then say that if this
is a dog it is going to bark and it is
going to be man's best friend and so on
and so forth so this kind of
conceptualizations can be developed
right and so that is water concept
really does so what is the nature of a
concept so facts explaining the nature
of a concept several models were
developed they were different models and
these models actually go ahead and
develop the nature of a concept for
example one of the model or the oldest
possible model is called the classical
view model now what are the classical
view model says it's actually a model
which dates back to the time of
Aristotle and so it's dominant it was
nominated in psychology - until the
1970s and then later on newer models for
example
Keynesian based view of categorization
and conceptualization came in and so
that took us or that took the center
stage but the classical view is the most
reliable view up till now so what does
the view say it says that all examples
or instances of a concept share
fundamental characteristic features so
basically what it says is that no matter
what happens all instances are all
different type of items which are
clubbed together in a concept which are
called which are known to be part of a
category and which resemble a concept
they share certain fundamental
characteristic features okay
for example if I say that a dog then all
dogs should have a tail they should way
they should bark and so on and so forth
now in particular the classical view of
concept holds the holds that the
features that the concepts share
together there are items which represent
the concept share together
I represent the features are represented
are individually necessary and
collectively sufficient so mostly the
what the classical music is that most
items which are grouped or categorized
under a concept or categorize of known
to be part of a concept or known to form
a concept resemblance to a concept now
they should have something called
features which are individually
necessary and sufficient and
collectively sufficient what is the
meaning of individually necessary and
collectively sufficient now individually
necessary means that each example must
have the feature if it is to be regarded
as a member of the category so basically
each and every example should have the
feature the kind of feature for it to be
called a member of up that particular
category or a member of that particular
answer example looking again back into
the dog concept so each member should
have one feature that is parking
so each dog should bark or it should
have a tail they should wait
right it should not have a drooping tail
kind of a thing or it should have a
certain kind of face drooping
year's men's best friend or whatever you
want to so it should have that thing so
okay so individually necessary means
that every item should have that
particular feature into it and what does
collectively sufficient really mean so
collectively sufficient means that
anything with each feature in the set
automatically becomes an instant of the
concept so if something is presented to
you a new item is presented to you which
has each feature of the concept or each
property of the concept it automatically
becomes a part of the content concept it
becomes a category or the concept so in
terms of looking at the triangle if we
look at the individual necessary thing
individual necessary thing say that this
each triangle should have three sides if
it has less than three sides it cannot
be a triangle if it has more than three
sides it cannot be a triangle and what
does nefesh unnecessary sufficient mean
necessary sufficient conceptualizing is
so the fact that it should have three
sides it should be a closed geometrical
form and then it is a triangle so any
figure which has three sides and which
have some kind of a closed geometrical
form necessarily is necessarily called a
triangle whether you call it a
equilateral triangle or you call it a
right angle triangle or if select rule
is so all kind of triangles would be
there but the idea is that it should
have these three sides and a closed
geometric form and that's what the
classical view say so in very simply it
says that there's most concept they
share instances and fundamental
characteristics and these
characteristics are individually
necessary and collectively sufficient
you have to look at this let's look at
the concept of a bachelor so the
features are it should be male adult and
married and human so then there is a
problem to this right now if I look at
somebody who's 10 years old you know 10
year old person is a male or a boy who's
10 year old if is a male
adult he's unmarried in his human but he
cannot be a bachelor and so these are
the deviations which are there and so
individually necessary collectively
sufficient that is the problem with it
but then that's a thing for the cat the
criticism of the model but before that
let's look into this
so then Bachelor should have these four
aspects now any person any male who's an
addled and who's unmarried and who's
human is actually a bachelor similarly
even numbers what are the cons of the
concept of an even number what are the
features of those numbers which are even
the features are it should be first an
integer so can be explained in the form
of P by Q first and it should be
divisible by two so if we can do that
then it is an even number and triangle
for example it should be a planar figure
so it should be a figure which should be
enough two-dimensional or it should be
non some plane and then a close
geometric figure so figure remember from
the first class where we are doing
perceptual illusion and we we showed you
this kind of a triangle right and so
this cannot be called a triangle the
reason being that this feeling that I'm
doing here is done by the brain and so
cannot be triangle until unless it has
all the size like this I cannot be
triangle and so it is not a triangle and
so what a triangle to be a triangle it
should be close to my trick figure and
then it should have three sides two
sides cannot be a triangle and so that
is what the features are so that what
are the implications of this classical
view the implications are concepts are
mentally represented list of features so
what then
this classical music is that concepts
what they do is that they mentally
represent a list of features which
should be then so any item which comes
in new should be compared at a keynote
this list so if I see a dog or a
triangle a dog for example if a concept
then I have a list of features example
it has to have four legs it has to have
a tail wagging tail man's best friend
should have should bark should have
tongue out most of the time and so on
and so forth and these are the number of
features or lists of each other so
classical music that concepts mentally
represent a list of features and so any
new instance is compared across that and
the more fit it is the more
it is also it assumed that membership in
a category is clear-cut but this
particular concept or this particular
model says is that any member of any
category has a clear-cut boundary the
idea is that you are either a part of a
category or you are not part of that
category and so that is how
categorization is done this boundary is
very clear-cut so you are either a dog
or not a dog right and so if you do not
have the sufficiently necessary features
or individually necessary features then
you don't become a dog so you should
have feature a let's say I have abcdefgh
features which are rated for a
particular concept of a dog then any new
instance or any new element which
basically is compared to this instance
then has to have these features and so
this it says that the mantri are very
clear-cut there is no disguise in the
boundaries or there is no overlap in the
boundaries and the third is that it
implies that all members within a
category are created equal
which basically means that there is
nothing called ideal concept and unknown
ideal concept what they say is each
member of the category shall equal kind
of or equal in all relations so most
members within a category are equal in
some 40 that's what the proposal is all
about now these are the problem and so
looking at dogs most dogs are equal
that's what they will say well so
although talking in terms of size for
not talking in terms of size most dogs
behave in similar manner that's what
they will talk about and when I say it
is clear-cut which basically means that
chihuahua or Siamese cat are different
because there's a clear-cut idea that
they don't bark and so by barking is a
individually necessary feature so Jesus
since the sign is cat wouldn't bark
it is not dog and since a shoe of a box
it is a dog and so that kind of a
clear-cut bond is
and all that kind of a clear-cut
boundary is out there so these are the
three implications of this but then this
new has several criticism so that's it's
an old concept and so it has several
problems with it first Joseph wanted
people judge different members of a
category differently right and so what
does it really mean it means that
different different members are the
categorized or arranged differently
that's the reason and the reason why is
that people judge category membership in
terms of how good a fit they are to the
category right and so when I look at an
audition that is a classiest dog or the
dog jazz dog that I can talk about but
when I look at a chihuahua it doesn't
seem like a dog and so this variation of
goodness of which is which element is a
good fit to a category all
characteristics of a category and some
members not having this good fit is a
problem because the implications is that
it is very clear-cut each member share
share more or less the same features but
this goodness of it and so for some
people a latte could be or a cappuccino
would be a coffee but a black coffee
would not be a coffee and were some
other people black coffee is the ideal
coffee and other coffees are variations
of its own order coffee and remember
those or think about those people who
are hardcore junkies in terms of coffees
but they will call coffee as a coffee
black tea as a tea but all other forms
of TS variations of tea and not a tea
right so it is variation of tea and so
this differences say that then the
different kind of coffee is a different
kind of peas which are available are not
in terms of sharing same features or not
equally putted together which is the
implication of the classical view the
idea idea is that people store and refer
to a list of necessary features when
judging a category membership is
doubtful now what does this basically
say that mainly remembering a number of
features and then comparing is something
which people generally
don't do and that is the reason why you
have abstract categories you tend to
have categories which are abstract which
doesn't fall into some kind of a
classification system and that is why
when I look at categories like household
or categories like marketplace now these
categories then not then don't go ahead
and compare this kind of relationship
or this kind of mental features and that
is why the problem is and that is what
the problem is all about so people do
not refer to these kind of lists and
they make violations in terms of
comparing things to a list right and the
third thing is that most people cannot
generate lists of features that are
individually necessary and collectively
sufficient to specify memberships into a
category so basically what it says is
that when it comes to telling people and
so there are experiments done in which
people were asked to generate lists
which says that what should be the list
or what should be the types of features
which anybody or any new element in that
category should have and which should
which should be the most necessary
features which are there people could
not come up with that and that was the
problem with it right so people were not
able to generate this individually
necessary and collectively sufficient
picture they could not pinpoint what is
individually necessary and what is
collecting this equation and so that is
one of the problems of this particular
view or this particular idea of the
categorization model the classical view
and so to explain further or to
circumvent the problems of the classical
view another model was proposed and
that's called the prototype the or
prototype model of categorization and so
what is this model it says that like
perceptual researchers conceptualist
researchers also believe the idea of
mental prototype now moving from lecture
on the perception revit thought deal
dealt with the prototype view or the
idea of prototype
right and this was them what I'm one of
the bottom of theories and they were
looking at how mentor types are formed
and so in terms of categorization also
conceptual researchers also think about
mental prototypes now what are these
prototypes generally these prototype in
numbers of visual researches the
prototype was an abstraction it had all
the all the properties of the particular
all the visual properties of the
elements which are clubbed together
similarly in the reception later
researchers mental prototypes are
idealized representation of some class
of objects and even so these are
idealized representation now one problem
with the classical view was they were
never talking about these idealized
representation but this is circumvented
by the prototype view where they say
that prototypes are idealized
representation so idealized
representations then may not have all
the features necessary or may not have
features which are individually
necessary and collectively sufficient
but it can also be possible that
prototypes may not represent or may not
be a part of the cat category itself it
could be something else thinking of
something else right so what would
happen is prototypes are basically
idealized representation of some class
of objects and even so these are
standards or these are kind of the class
or the idealized class a prototype of
concepts are feature or aspects that are
characteristics that are typical of
member of the category rather than
necessary anticipation so basically what
this theory banks on is the typicality
factor what it says is that the
prototype view says that prototypes
generally have features or aspects which
characteristically or which define a
particular category right and so if so
for so if you want to make a prototype
you have to look at several instances of
that particular category and from the
several instances of category then we'll
a be able to basically bring out those
things which are common so protect you
is or the form of a prototype is similar
to forming calm
among among a lot of data and so there
are lots of statistical technique which
does that right and so here also their
prototype we're forming a prototype we
find the combination dough's properties
which are shared by most members of the
category right and so most members of
the category share a feature that it
shouldn't be the picture of a category
and so it should it could be one feature
it could be multiple feature which most
members share now it doesn't specify
this thing that it is individually
necessary and collectively sufficient
but it says is what it says is that if I
am looking at a category and if I am
looking at a number of elements in a
category and if there are commonalities
between them if there are common
features between them the commonalities
are what sum together to form the
prototype now what do I mean by this so
the meaning of this is that no
individual feature or aspects need be
present in the instant so to be count as
a member of the category so we are not
looking at any individual feature right
we are not looking at one particular
feature which should be shared by all
people we are saying that most members
have these features so not that one
feature should not be present in
everyone it should be that it could be
that most people have a particular
feature but some of them may not have it
and so that could also be a reason for a
particular category for example our
prototype example let's look at cars now
most cars would have an engine and would
have four seats right and that's how our
definition of car is but how what about
the definition of a flying car and when
I talk about flying car it doesn't go or
it doesn't run on the road and so the
sufficient feature that most cars run on
a road is exactly not true similarly for
the fact that toy cars may not have an
engine but then still they are cars
right and so we can be classified under
cars and so this is this these are the
variation so one of the things is that
no individual feature need we present is
one of the features that the prototype
view says to be conscious and under the
category but the number of more number
of characteristic feature or aspects on
instance has the more likely the be
regarded as a member of the category so
basically here we don't talk about one
individual feature one defining feature
but you look at more number of
characters in each other so it's kind of
more the merrier right so the more
number of features you have which
resemble you or which make you closer to
a category no more typical you are to
that category and the more I realize
your prototype later right and so one
way of doing it is to look at a number
of messages so when we are having
looking at prototyping or when we are
looking at how to make a prototype the
first thing that that needs to be done
is to look at a number of variations of
that category a number of variations of
that concept and with that variations
find out the commonality right which has
the highest commonality once you have
that commonality that commonality should
be what should be idealized the
prototype or that community should be a
feature of the prototype because most
members have it and that that is how
they are defined and also the prototype
move of category and conscious refer to
the family resemblance structure of
concept or they basically go ahead and
say that this is some kind of a how do
you assemble structure so what is the
can reasonable structure a structure in
which each member has a number of
features sharing different features with
different members right so that's the
idea so a structure where each member
has a number of features sharing
different features with different
members so what would happen is that
there would be some commonality but then
each one says other features with
someone and so a good example to
understand this is look at the central
figure knife if you look at the central
figure 9 the person here he has these
mustaches and so this this is the
idealized version and it is the
idealized version because it has
properties from all of these right so if
you look into all the several variations
of eight different forms of image this
is called the family of view of
prototyping and so here what happens is
if you look into this this person
doesn't has a moustache and so has a
beard and has these eyeglasses this
person has a beard and has a glasses but
the color of the hair is different
doesn't have an eyeglass
beard and mustache both here it has only
beard different color hair no spectacles
with spectacles and so on and so forth
and so this is the
most idolized version the ninth version
in the messiah's version because it
shares a number of features with all of
them hey Lou it's all about
commonalities the more number of
features that any element share with a
particular category the better example
it is of that and the better chance it
stands to become a prototype the
prototype is that particular element
which has shares most number of features
are which shares commonalities between
different different items in that
particular category so prototype is
basically a some form of abstraction
that includes all the characteristic for
category and may or may not be actual
instance of the category so it's at
times what could happen is a prototype
is developed for the prototype is not
the actual product right the prototype
is not the actual manifestation so I I
may have a prototype of something I may
have an idealized concept over something
but it never actually becomes a
categorical item of the category so
prototypes are that kind of a thing
right because forming uploaded a with
that type is not possible right and so
the idealized spawns example right idea
I realized one is that you should do so
many things but most phones to share
this for example one of the things that
the phone should do it should also be
able to trial teleporter but that is the
prototype right but phones do not tell
you put you in real senses
so what phones do share other features
of a tidally voting machine which is
your idealized construction of what a
prototype is but then the road type
cannot have an existence in itself so at
times what happens is the prototype can
not be demonstrated
but then the prototype is an idealized
over again off I should have it's an
idealized version of a category also
prototypes are often thought of as
mental summaries or averages of an
instances so what that's what I was
trying to explain to you what really
happens is I look at all the instances
and I look at the commonalities and
based on that I create an average and
the average of all the number of
elements which is there that is what the
prototype is it is the average it is the
exact average and so averages all parts
of it averages related the average point
or the mean is related
to every element on to onto my data and
so basically that's what my prototype is
it's a mental average also concepts they
exist at many levels of hierarchy what
really happens is the concepts a the
different hierarchies example the top
level concept the bottom level concept
remember the example that I gave you in
terms of musical instruments so musical
instrument is a higher level concept and
bass guitar is a lower lower concept
because it forms or it is coming under
the concept of musical instrument right
and within the higher dimension of
musical instrument is the instrument
right and so these are the different
categorization so basically concept
existed different level hierarchies but
one day of abstraction appears
psychologically fundamental in terms of
prototypes at the psychological level or
at the fundamental level or at the basic
level most prototype should have the
same feature and that's what it talks
about so this is the basic level and
different from both higher levels of
were subordinate and the lower level
that is the subordinate concept so the
basic level is that level in which
prototypes are formed and the basic
level is that level which most items
that belong to the category share so
basically then this is that level where
that feature is there or that feature is
shared between all items which are the
core feature which is the core feature
and remember the dog example so barking
is one feature which most dogs should
have so no matter what kind of dog and
looking at whether I'm looking at the
Chihuahua which is a very very small dog
on a per million which is again a very
small talk to the Great Dane which is a
huge dog out there or st. Bernard which
is again a huge dog in big doe
Rottweiler which is again a kind of a
temperamental dog and other kind of dogs
do we look at oscillation which is a
huge dog so all of them then share so
there are different levels of those
prototypes so the highest dog the
slowest dog but then the one feature the
the basic feature is working and at that
they should be able to coincide or that
that is the so concepts then have some
kind of a basic level where both the the
difference are at that level they should
match now what is the cricket the
critique of this prototype view now one
of the critique of this perturb you is
that the limit of the conceptual
boundaries now where is the limit of
this conceptual boundaries what should
be the limit when something should be
not referred as a part of the concept or
not sure example example of a concept or
an item of a concept and those that is
not defined or basically this prototype
view then as protect you says that it is
a mental average and so any element can
enter into it and so there are no limits
or there are the conceptual boundaries
or there are no clear-cut boundaries
which have been defined by the prototype
view because any new item can also share
some features and so where is it that
this averaging really works or what
percentage of match should the new item
have that is not defining so there is no
limit to this conceptual boundaries or
where the limit is to be drawn another
thing is the typicality rating which
basically says that what is the extent
of typicality for example this
typicality so when I see the dog the
let's say up or top what birds know if
you go to the West Robin would be a
typical bird right but then where for
india since then people have not seen
Robin how does Robin become a bird or
basically people will not think about
Robin when you say a bird people think
of what a crow or a sparrow or some
other kind of a bird that you or a son
bird for example when you think about it
so basically then typicality the idea of
typicality rating is another feature
which which should be looked at and so
what happens here is that as context
changes these typicality
changes and so that is not explained by
the prototype
because when I say this is the prototype
then it should be universal kind of a
thing and true most items will be there
so that is not explained as concepts
with the with the changing of context
changes the prototype changes also it
could not be explained and the third
interesting view is called the exemplar
view and so what is the example you see
it says that concepts include
representations of at least some actual
instances so it denies the idea that
there are mental summaries are there
sufficiently individual reaches which
are there and this view goes ahead and
says that there is some actual instant
instance or there is some actual
representation to which things are
compared to which new items are compared
and that is how they form into
categories and that is our concept is
developed right so what this theory says
is that there is an example always in
mind so when I think about something
when I think about a car you think of a
particular model of a car and that's so
categorizes new instance by comparing
two representations of previous
resources for example example us example
when I when you show me a new car what I
will do is my head or my brain has an
idea
so here the prototype is actually in
terms of something which is existing now
the differences in the prototype view my
prototype could be an instance which
doesn't exist which cannot exist but in
the exemplar view it has to exist so
when you show me a new car new kind of
car what I do is I compare to the idea
of a car which I have in the my mind and
this idea is actually a actual instance
of it so I think of the Maruti Baleno
which I have and I compare it this which
any other car and then see whether this
item is a car or a truck or a scooter or
whatever it is so that kind of a thing
is there so my mental concept is there
or that mental example is then I will do
the comparison the third thing is
difficult categorization unclear are
typical instances because such instances
are similar to examples or different
categories and so when we have our
typical instance how does the exemplar
really work so suppose let's say if I
have word with clip rings how do I
categorize them and so it is a problem
so difficult categorizing unclear are
typical instances according to this view
it is very difficult of how do we
categorize a typical incidence into it
so what are the critiques of it the
critic cyst it is the prototype view
like the protect beauties to
unconstrained it's hugely unconstrained
in the sense that there are no
boundaries and fails to specify which
instance which eventually be stored as
example as so how do I develop the
exemplar that's the problem
now with the like the prototype view I
do not have boundaries into it and what
makes an example of example the car I
possess should be an exemplar or should
the example miss the car I desire to
possess or should it be something else
so that's not very clear and that's a
problem with this particular view also
how different examples are called to
mind at a time categorization is also a
problem and so another thing is that I
might have seen so many cars so
basically the kind of car that I am
doing the comparison to for example the
car air causes how does it come to mind
how does it compete with all the cars
that I have known as a comparison
standard so how do I bring for that
standard that's another question which
is out there and which this particular
view doesn't explain and so this is
these are the two two takes into this so
in today's lecture what we did was we
looked at what is categorization and
conceptualization how does this classic
categorization and conceptualization
really work and we also looked at the
different models of it the classical
view what are the problems of the
classical music fits of the classical
view also looked at the different
prototype view which talks about the
mental averages and summaries of making
the prototype and how it it scores over
the eggs the classical view and then we
talked about the example view which is
basically an instance of the prototype
and how that explains or that goes ahead
and makes it our task easy in terms of
categorization and conceptualizations of
making concepts and categories thank you
[Music]
you